---
author: "Youwen Wu"
authorTwitter: "@youwen5.bsky.social"
keywords: "politics,uspol"
lang: "en"
title: "The world is ending and people are too bored to care"
desc: "where do we go from here?"
---

## Prelude

The decades of relative peace and prosperity in the developed world you and I
have enjoyed are likely over. We will not enjoy the same quality of life our
parents did, and there is a very real chance the next generation will have even
less. And no one cares.

## So about the world ending

[The
tariffs](https://www.cnn.com/2025/04/08/business/trump-china-tariff/index.html)
being threatened (by the time you've read this, already in place) on China and
every other trading partner the US has and has ever had are, with as little
sensationalization as possible, _biblically apocalyptic_. People will lose
their jobs. They will suffer, starve, die. This is likely at least as bad as
2008 and arguably worse, because this isn't caused by irresponsible gambling
with subprime mortgages by greedy bankers, but by incompetent idiots hitting
buttons they don't understand in the highest seats of power in the most
powerful nation in the world.

104% tariffs don't just mean the price of goods double, although that would
already be quite catastrophic. Global supply chains are so interwoven and
complex that all the components in some good could travel back and forth many,
many times before the final product makes it to the consumer. All of this is to
say that the _best-case_ scenario is you pay 2000 dollars for your next iPhone.
The more likely outcome is that the additional cost a manufacturer incurs
making a widget will exponentiate so hard that many goods simply become
unprofitable to sell to the US.

The abundance Americans have right now is swiftly ending. And this is without
even mentioning the myriad other things Americans are losing; namely civil
rights, civil liberties, due process, the rule of law, critical research
funding, and so on. We betrayed all of our allies and proved entirely
untrustworthy as a global trading partner, military partner, or any sort of
partner. We threw away decades of soft power to save a fraction of a percent on
foreign aid. American hegemony is arguably done, for good. It turns out the
best way to maintain relative peace is to build an interconnected and deeply
integrated global network of allies who mutually rely on each other for trade
and production of specialized goods, such that it's far too risky for any
nation to attack another. We had this, until 3 months ago. This is not the sort
of thing you can just rollback in the next administration. 

So yeah, the world we knew is ending. We had countless opportunities to stop
it, but we watched it happen in slow motion. And now the button has been
pressed, placing us right on the precipice from pre-apocalypse to the actual
apocalypse.

## Interlude

_On the Beach_ (1957) is a novel about life after the nuclear apocalypse. The
US and Russia and the rest of the world is agulf in flames and nuclear
hellfire. The setting is Australia, which avoided most of the immediate
catastrophe. People mingle in the streets, going about their day-to-day. But
everyone knows inexorably the nuclear fallout will wash ashore and wipe the
rest of them out. Nobody knows exactly how many months, but their fate is
sealed.

How do you live in the pre-apocalypse? Curiously in Melbourne, things seem to
be business as usual. People work and shop. A couple plants flowers in their
garden that won't bloom until next year, despite the nuclear fallout surely
having finished them by then. A US serviceman refuses to go out with a local
woman because he has a wife and kids waiting "back in the States," who've
almost certainly perished.

Perhaps they seem irrational. But what would you do any differently? The people
in _On the Beach_ know their end is already set in motion. There is quite
literally nothing they can possibly do. Should they instead hysterically charge
through the streets in a fit of mania? At what point does pre-apocalypse become
apocalypse? At what point should knowing that the apocalypse _will_ arrive
elicit the same response as the apocalypse actually arriving?

## Coda


